{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 WEBVTT
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 1
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:00:04.000 --> 00:00:22.130
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Are there any stories you remember that your parents or grandparents told you that happened to your family during the Genocide?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 2
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:00:22.150 --> 00:01:04.230
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Of course. My grandfather told us a lot that during the killings in Turkey he had already been a soldier for 9 years. He'd been shot in the eye, so he had one eye only. I was a small child when he told me this, but I remember till now that they got to Syria, Aleppo with a lot suffering and hardship. And like that he would tell me stories that I remember until today.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 3
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:01:04.250 --> 00:01:08.850
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Do you know what town or village they were from?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 4
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:01:08.870 --> 00:01:11.820
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Marash.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 5
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:01:11.840 --> 00:01:26.830
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Were there other stories about how they came to Aleppo or what happened during the deportation?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 6
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:01:26.850 --> 00:01:37.870
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 I do not remember how they arrived in Aleppo, but I know they had to walk barefoot to Aleppo.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 7
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:01:37.890 --> 00:01:56.560
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 They got scared and fled barefoot. My grandfather's brother was also with him at that time. I do not remember how old my father would have been, but I think he must have been 1 or 2 or 3. Or maybe he was born in Aleppo? I do not remember.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 8
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:01:56.580 --> 00:02:18.590
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 And then when they came to Aleppo, do you know what difficulties they faced rebuilding their life in Aleppo.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 9
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:02:18.610 --> 00:03:10.060
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 My grandfather worked at a cotton factory. They paid with gold then, there was no money yet. They brought a few pieces of gold, bought a house and continued their lives. My father was a woodworker, he made furniture. We had our own house and that is where he worked. \'a0My uncle went to Brazil. My family just kept going on. My father got married, etc.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 10
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:03:10.080 --> 00:03:19.980
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 When you grew up, did you live in the same house and which neighborhood was that in?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 11
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:03:20.000 --> 00:03:31.570
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Yes, yes. In the Nor Kiugh neighborhood. I also took up my father's craft.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 12
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:03:31.590 --> 00:03:49.690
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Can you describe a little bit what it was like growing up in Nor Gyugh? What school you went to, what activities you did?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 13
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:03:49.710 --> 00:04:08.960
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 I went to Mesrobian school till the 6th grade, then I learned my father's craft. My father needed my help. We were three sons. My other brothers practiced other crafts, and I worked with my father.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 14
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:04:08.980 --> 00:04:27.350
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 We went to the Armenian community club. I entered Armenian political organization life, and lived on. I grew up, went to the army and served for 3.5 years there. When I came back my father died. He was sick.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 15
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:04:27.370 --> 00:04:49.000
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 When you left school to work, was that your decision or you had wanted to do or your father told you to start working?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 16
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:04:49.020 --> 00:05:12.490
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 My father worked at home and he needed help. A carpenter needs an assistant, doesn't he? There was no worker then to help him and it was tiring. So I had to leave school and learn the craft.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 17
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:05:12.510 --> 00:05:21.300
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Did you enjoy working with your father and learning from him carpentry?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 18
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:05:21.320 --> 00:05:25.600
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Of course, Of course.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 19
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:05:25.620 --> 00:05:45.860
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 When you went to the Army, was that something...can you talk about that experience? Was it difficult, did you have a lot of friends that were also going?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 20
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:05:45.880 --> 00:06:16.420
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 One makes many friends in the army. The young men in our neighborhood also served in the army--we were together in different places. Military service is a good thing. A young man should serve in the army to in order to know the meaning of life and the value of his parents.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 21
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:06:16.440 --> 00:06:53.060
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Serving in the army teaches a young man many things: first of all, respect. \'a0It builds character. It teaches you to respect both young and old. That is what a soldier learns. Thank God, Our parents raised us that way even before we went to the army. So when we went to the army, they would see how respectful we were, and we'd enter the officer's cabinet. They'd know that we knew how to respect others and that' we'd been brought up well.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 22
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:06:53.080 --> 00:07:15.510
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Before the Army, when you were living in Nor Gyugh were you interacting mostly with Armenians or also non-Armenians?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 23
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:07:15.530 --> 00:07:43.130
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 At that time, there were only maybe 1-2 Arab families. The rest were Armenians. On every road, there were houses next to each other with yards connecting the neighbors. There were about 2 or 3 Muslim families I think. Further up there were more, but our area only had 2 or 3.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 24
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:07:43.150 --> 00:08:07.200
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Of course we had markets where people from the villages came to get vegetables, including Armenians. But essentially, everyone was Armenian. There were also a few Kurds. And Arabs. But the majority was Armenians. There were no apartment buildings, only houses with yards.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 25
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:08:07.220 --> 00:08:25.110
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 At that time did you feel Armenian or Syrian or a mix of both?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 26
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:08:25.130 --> 00:09:11.150
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 First off, Armenian. Then, it goes without saying, if you were born in Syria, you're also a Syrian. We went to school, and we've known since childhood that we have a motherland, Armenia. We've learned songs since that time. The children that are born and raised here, most do not know the songs that we used to sing. We've known since childhood that we have a motherland, Armenia, Armenian relatives, and we are Armenians--we felt Armenian.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 27
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:09:11.170 --> 00:09:35.650
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 When you went to the Army did that change how you felt about being Syrian at all or was it hard to be around not as many Armenians?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 28
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:09:35.670 --> 00:10:24.720
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 No, no, never. In those years, when I went to the army, there would always be Armenians in the barracks. Always, at least more than one. They knew that you were Armenian. The leaders of the barracks were well-disposed towards Armenians because Armenians are considered reliable. Of course there were Armenians, and we never felt like an alien in the army; there was no discrimination between Muslims or Kurds or Armenians. We were Armenian and there was absolutely no discrimination against anyone. They never said anything like "Oh he is Armenian, or he is this or that." Never.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 29
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:10:24.740 --> 00:10:43.130
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Can you describe your life after the Army. So, coming back to Nor Gyugh, if you started work or a family?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 30
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:10:43.150 --> 00:11:21.490
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 After I returned from the army, well before I finished my time in the army, my father died. I had a workshop, my own workshop. I was a little depressed over my father's early death. I couldn't work for a year. Then I realized things couldn't go on that way. Everyone would say, why don't you start a shop and work, etc. etc.? 
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 31
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:11:21.510 --> 00:11:31.960
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 So, I began to work later and for a long while, 10 years, I did the same job.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 32
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:11:31.980 --> 00:12:03.200
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 I had some accidents. I came to Armenia in 1991. I wanted to see my homeland and visit my relatives. I came to look around and loved it to the level that I was here for three months but it felt like three days.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 33
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:12:03.220 --> 00:12:38.610
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 I'd met many people who'd been to Aleppo. Everything was great. Well, the circumstances were hard, but that was a good time. Then it became a little difficult. I came back to Armenia in 1992 and got engaged. Then, in 1993, I came and got married. Later, I went back to Aleppo after I got married in 1993 and I didn't come back here for 20 years.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 34
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:12:38.630 --> 00:13:09.600
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 I would send my wife to Armenia and later children to Armenia. Their grandparents and my aunt lived here. 20 years later, I said let me go see how my motherland was doing. It was good, and I noticed many changes. I'd inquire from those who'd visit Armenia and they'd tell me what the streets were like now. I had known the streets by heart before.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 35
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:13:09.620 --> 00:13:35.250
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 When I came, I was surprised, many things had changed in Armenia, the city had changed entirely. There's everything here. However, unfortunately, the people have regressed in their opinion of outsiders.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 36
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:13:35.270 --> 00:14:26.110
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 It is difficult for us to understand this. In Syria, when we see a foreigner, we rush to help. We think, "The man is from Armenia, has come down from Armenia." We've helped many people like that.. Unfortunately, I have not seen that here. Not even with acquaintances or close relatives. My wife's father is my mother's cousin. They migrated here in 1946. [1]
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 37
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:14:26.130 --> 00:14:34.900
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 We had problems later. An accident, too...
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 38
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:14:34.920 --> 00:14:59.710
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 When you first came to Armenia, the time when you met your wife, did you ever think of moving here or you've always knew you wanted go back to Aleppo?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 39
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:14:59.730 --> 00:15:16.430
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 In 2000-2001 many friends and acquaintances of mine would visit Armenia and see the changes. They praised Armenia. They encouraged me to go see the country myself.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 40
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:15:16.450 --> 00:15:41.750
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 At this point, I had dropped my father's craft, and started to work in the culinary field. They'd tell me that I would do really well in Armenian because there was no Syrian cuisine in Armenia. I told my wife I wanted to sell the house, go to Armenia and open a place there. Her parents were there, etc.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 41
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:15:41.770 --> 00:15:53.190
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 She said she didn't want to go back to Armenia. My wife was born and raised in Armenia and said she didn't want to go to Armenia. So we stayed in Aleppo.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 42
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:15:53.210 --> 00:16:17.610
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Later, in 2010, a close friend of mine, a dentist, told me to go to Armenia for a trip. He told me to go. He said there were food places opening Armenia and doing well there. 
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 43
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:16:17.630 --> 00:16:55.220
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 He said there were two restaurants of our type of cuisines--one Lebanese, and a friend of ours, Koko, had opened another in 2000. He said go see for yourself, maybe you'll decide to move there. I came here and looked around at the end of 2010. I came and I loved it here. I even worked here for a week, with our type of cuisine not theirs. 
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 44
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:16:55.240 --> 00:17:14.200
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 I thought I might move here and work here. My children were still small, and I thought they could grow up in an Armenian environment. They were at ease in Aleppo, but I wanted them to grow up in Armenia, in their motherland.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 45
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:17:14.220 --> 00:17:31.960
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 They were small and quick to learn. They speak the language well with a good accent. I decided to move here. This was before the war.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 46
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:17:31.980 --> 00:17:51.050
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 How was it for your wife resettling in Aleppo when she moved back. It sounds like she really liked the life there?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 47
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:17:51.070 --> 00:18:25.740
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Before we were married, she had visited Aleppo. I got her a visa. She's the daughter of my mother's cousin. So I got her father and her a visa for them to come and see Aleppo. She came and loved it there. And were not strange to each other. We were related. Her father and my mother are cousins. We liked each other, and we both said ok.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 48
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:18:25.760 --> 00:18:42.130
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 So, we got married in 1993, came to Aleppo and it was not like a foreign land to her. We lived with understanding, but when we came here, problems began.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 49
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:18:42.150 --> 00:19:57.730
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 So we moved here. Things were fine for about a year. We had work and were glad. My brother-in-law worked as a driver for someone. They had a place. He knew that I was a cook, and so he offered to start a restaurant together. I agreed. I went to Aleppo, and brought goods back with me. I was the first person to open a food place with our cuisine in Armenia. My wife is a cook, too. Many say, \'93Oh, but your wife is from Armenia.\'94 But she learned to cook in Aleppo from my mother, and my aunt. My wife cooks very well.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 50
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:19:57.750 --> 00:20:39.100
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 We started the restaurant. At that time my wife and I had a disagreement because of her sister's husband. We worked for two months. Then we had another problem, and I quit my job. My wife stayed in order to not to spoil her relationship with her brother-in-law.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 51
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:20:39.120 --> 00:21:08.440
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Two months later, four days before the New Year, she had an accident. There was an elevator in the restaurant, they'd bring food up in an elevator. My wife got on the elevator, in the third floor the elevator cable broke and my wife fell and broke her spine.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 52
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:21:08.460 --> 00:21:43.070
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 She to have surgery- $5,500 worth. They had to put 12 screws in her back. It was free from the Diaspora Ministry and the Healthcare Ministry provided for it because I am Syrian Armenian.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 53
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:21:43.090 --> 00:22:04.390
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 She had a second round of therapy a year later. She couldn't walk. The doctor said when she gets stronger and has more muscle, let's try another round of therapy for the legs because she could not walk. She was in bed for 6 months.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 54
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:22:04.410 --> 00:23:03.120
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Like that, my wife and I became distant because of her family. We've now lived apart since 2013. The children live with her, their mother. They're grown up now, no longer children. Her family didn't want... They knew that I was alone here with no one. They could do whatever they wanted. I wanted to do everything for them. Even now, I do what I can.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 55
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:23:03.140 --> 00:23:30.280
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 I believe that God sees it all. He knows that I've never caused anybody harm. So, I lived on, till now. Thank God I work, for 10 hours a day before the barbecue grill.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 56
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:23:30.300 --> 00:23:36.050
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Are the kids with their mother?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 57
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:23:36.070 --> 00:23:56.010
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Yes, they are with their mother. They come visit me, but they stay with their mother. I bring them to me, but she's sick. Especially my elder daughter--she helps out her mother with the cleaning, cooking, laundry, shopping, etc. 
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 58
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:23:56.030 --> 00:24:20.910
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Since that time, I know that it has been very hard, have you been able to start \'a0new restaurant or a how has it been working since then?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 59
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:24:20.930 --> 00:25:01.540
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 I was unemployed for a year afterwards. Then in 2013, I went to Sochi through a friend. I worked there for 2-3 months, then came back. They were about to start a restaurant here and they'd heard that I make specialty sandwiches well. I worked there for quite a while. Then in 2014 went to Sochi again, on business and came back.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 60
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:25:01.560 --> 00:25:32.040
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 There's a strange thing here with the local restaurants. They want a specialist and then ask your age when you apply. You're 50, they say you're too old for the job. You say, do you need a specialist or a young person? So, because of that, I didn't work for a year and a half.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 61
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:25:32.060 --> 00:26:20.460
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 These Syrian restaurants didn't exist yet. In 2014, there was nothing. Neither "Abu Hagop," nor "Teryan," none of them had opened yet and I couldn't find a job. I'd do what I could, through friends, relatives, etc. Then they opened "Abu Hagop" and I began to work here. Thank God, I'm fine. It has been one year. I'm at ease, I have work, I'm content. I get tired, but that's ok, I'm still able to be on my feet, thank God.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 62
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:26:20.480 --> 00:26:41.610
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 The two times you went to Russia what were the experiences like, were there lots of Armenians who were looking for work or was it easy to find a job?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 63
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:26:41.630 --> 00:26:59.890
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 I didn't go bt myself to Sochi. They called me over with a job. And the one who gave me a place was Armenian, and there were both Armenians and Russians working there.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 64
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:26:59.910 --> 00:27:30.390
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 So, this whole time you were working in Armenia, you left Syria before the war, what was it like, did you hear friends and relatives going through difficulties while you were in Armenia?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 65
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:27:30.410 --> 00:28:02.590
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Yes, of course. My brother is there, my mother, my friends and acquaintances. I didn't see the war, I only watched it on TV. I do not want to lie. I went to Aleppo on business in 2012, I only heard shootings at night. But didn't see the war itself.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 66
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:28:02.610 --> 00:28:20.970
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 From Armenia, did you feel like you helped your family members back in Syria? Did you try to help them? Did they want to come here or stay?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 67
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:28:20.990 --> 00:29:07.380
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Of course I wanted to help my brothers and mother, but I was myself in need of help here, in Armenia. I was unemployed in Armenia for a year. In this city, if you do not work one day, you are four months behind. This is not Aleppo. In Aleppo, if I did not work for one year, for example, it \'a0was ok, but here just one day of no work sets you back a year. Even your brother will not give you 100 drams in Armenia.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 68
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:29:07.400 --> 00:29:32.970
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 What you have seen in your whole time here, how has the city changed with the opening of Syrian restaurants, have you seen positive changes?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 69
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:29:32.990 --> 00:29:54.270
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Of course, there were many changes. Syrian-Armenians, not European-Armenians, who used to \'a0go back to visit Aleppo from the US, Canada or France, now have to come to Armenia because their relatives are in Armenia now. 
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 70
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:29:54.290 --> 00:30:16.990
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 So, during the business season the restaurants work comparatively more, there are weddings, engagement parties, baptism celebrations. It's been 2-3 years that people come here from Canada, America, Australia, because their relatives are here, not in Aleppo.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 71
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:30:17.010 --> 00:30:46.780
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 In your opinion, you know a lot about restaurant business and other businesses, what do you think the Armenian economy or Government could do to support more businesses opening and to make it easier?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 72
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:30:46.800 --> 00:31:14.050
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 [Laughs] Now, the Government? I don't know where to start, I don't \'a0really want to talk about those things. First of all, it's very difficult to start a business in Armenia. Very hard. Why?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 73
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:31:14.070 --> 00:31:38.130
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 For example, I want to open my restaurant. First, the tax department will come find you. Second, others you don't know will come from all sides.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 74
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:31:38.150 --> 00:32:14.970
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Third, they won't leave you alone, for you to do your job in peace, there are people who will get in your way in this city. From all four sides, a few people have grabbed hold of the city. They don't let you do anything, work or just walking in peace. They come and find you. So for that reason, getting by here is hard.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 75
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:32:14.990 --> 00:32:54.470
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 For example, if you want to open a restaurant, which is now my trade. The restaurant season lasts 5 months, you work for 5 months and have to struggle for the rest of the year. You have to pay the rent, the workers, for the electricity, taxes, pay for this, pay for that. They change a law daily, you have to hang on, and it's difficult to struggle here. Especially in the winter, from December to March, 4 months. 
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 76
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:32:54.490 --> 00:33:19.240
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 You have to pay 800-900 to 1,000 dollars for the smallest space, for 3/4 square meters. That is, you have to go hungry and thirsty to pay the rent for those four months. If you don't have income, how can you pay the rent? 
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 77
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:33:19.260 --> 00:33:37.090
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 What you earn in the summer hardly covers the winter expenses. Besides, many opened a restaurant, although they're not specialized in cooking or business. People are struggling here.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 78
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:33:37.110 --> 00:34:00.410
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 Our restaurant, "Abu Hagop" has been in \'a0Aleppo for 60 years, so it is very well known. Thank God we work in season, but not in winter. We sit for 4 or 5 months. But my assistant has to be paid his daily wages, other payments, pay, pay, pay. Wages, electricity, rent, everything.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 79
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:34:00.430 --> 00:34:32.140
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 One a more personal level, how have these years in Armenia been? Did you feel very welcome here or does it still feel the Motherland you learned about in Syria?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 80
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:34:32.160 --> 00:34:39.950
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 When I had first come, for 7-8 months, yes., I did feel welcome, but later--no.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 81
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:34:39.970 --> 00:35:01.910
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 In the next 5-10 years what plans do you have for yourself? Do you want to stay in Armenia, do you want to go somewhere else? What are your hopes?
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs30 \cf2 82
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 00:35:01.930 --> 00:35:29.741
\f1\fs24 \

\f0\fs30 If my work goes well here, I'll stay. I'd like to go to Aleppo, I've missed Aleppo very much--the environment, my friends. I really miss it. If Aleppo were the Aleppo it used to be, I wouldn't stay here for a minute. I'd take my children and leave.}